unit-2/README.md, before:

# Creating Data Models

The data transformation process using dbt + Dremio involves writing transformation logic in dbt using SQL which is executed using Dremio’s SQL engine. These SQL queries are referred to as **models** and are saved as .sql files. 

In this unit we will create and execute some models, starting with a raw dataset and ending with a dataset intended for business use.

## Common dbt Commands and Their Purpose

Throughout this tutorial we will use a few select dbt commands. Below are details on them to help familiarise you. **Before running any dbt command, ensure that your terminal is navigated to the folder containing your `dbt_project.yml` file.** This ensures dbt has access to the project configuration and can execute the commands successfully.

#### **Core dbt Commands**

1. **`dbt run`**
   - **Purpose**: Executes all the models defined in your project by running the SQL files and materializing the results (tables, views, or incremental models) according to the configurations.
   - **Use Case**: Use this command to build or refresh your data models in the target database.

   ```bash
   dbt run
   ```

2. **`dbt build`**

- **Purpose**: Combines multiple actions—compiling, running, testing, and building documentation—all in one command.
- **Use Case**: Use this for an end-to-end execution of models, ensuring they run, pass tests, and have documentation updated.
    
    ```
    dbt build
    ```

3. **`dbt test`**

- **Purpose**: Runs the tests defined in your tests directory or within your models to validate data quality and integrity.
- **Use Case**: Use this command to check that your data meets the defined constraints (e.g., unique values, no nulls).

    ```
    dbt test
    ```

4. **`dbt list`**

- **Purpose**: Lists the resources (models, tests, seeds, etc.) in your project.
- **Use Case**: Use this to get a quick overview of the components in your dbt project.

    ```
    dbt list
    ```

#### Tips for Using dbt Commands

- Commands like `dbt run`, `dbt test`, and `dbt build` can be scoped to specific models or directories by using selectors (e.g., `dbt run --select <model_name>`).


## Create sub-folders for the models

Nested underneath the `models` directory create the following two directories:
 - `intermediate`
 - `marts`

At this point I also recommend to delete the `example` directory. This was auto-created with your dbt project, but we will not be using it and do not want those models to be executed.

## Create an intermediate model

- Create an .sql file called `int_trips__formatted` within the `models.intermediate` directory. 
- This will take the raw data from `nessie.nyc.raw.trips` and rename and reformat the attributes.
- Use `dbt run` to create the view in Dremio.
- Navigate to `nessie.nyc.intermediate` to view the created view.
- Compare the view with the source file in `nessie.nyc.raw`.

## Create a marts model

- Create an .sql file called `nyc_taxi_gross_income` within the models.marts directory. 
- This will use the intermediate view `int_trips__formatted` and drop unwanted coloumns.
- Use `dbt run` to create the view in Dremio.
- Navigate to `nessie.nyc.marts` to view the created view.

Commit message:

moved raw dataset creation to unit 2

unit-2/README.md, after:

# Creating Data Models

The data transformation process using dbt + Dremio involves writing transformation logic in dbt using SQL which is executed using Dremio’s SQL engine. These SQL queries are referred to as **models** and are saved as .sql files. 

In this unit we will create and execute some models, starting with a raw dataset and ending with a dataset intended for business use.

## Common dbt Commands and Their Purpose

Throughout this tutorial we will use a few select dbt commands. Below are details on them to help familiarise you. **Before running any dbt command, ensure that your terminal is navigated to the folder containing your `dbt_project.yml` file.** This ensures dbt has access to the project configuration and can execute the commands successfully.

#### **Core dbt Commands**

1. **`dbt run`**
   - **Purpose**: Executes all the models defined in your project by running the SQL files and materializing the results (tables, views, or incremental models) according to the configurations.
   - **Use Case**: Use this command to build or refresh your data models in the target database.

   ```bash
   dbt run
   ```

2. **`dbt build`**

- **Purpose**: Combines multiple actions—compiling, running, testing, and building documentation—all in one command.
- **Use Case**: Use this for an end-to-end execution of models, ensuring they run, pass tests, and have documentation updated.
    
    ```
    dbt build
    ```

3. **`dbt test`**

- **Purpose**: Runs the tests defined in your tests directory or within your models to validate data quality and integrity.
- **Use Case**: Use this command to check that your data meets the defined constraints (e.g., unique values, no nulls).

    ```
    dbt test
    ```

#### Tips for Using dbt Commands

- Commands like `dbt run`, `dbt test`, and `dbt build` can be scoped to specific models or directories by using selectors (e.g., `dbt run --select <model_name>`).


## Create a raw source dataset in Dremio

To data used to create your models will be an Iceberg table stored in nessie. You will be using the dataset `NYC-taxi-trips.csv` found in the Samples object storage. 

- Click through to `Samples."samples.dremio.com"`. 
- Hover over the file and click on the icon on the far right to [format the data to a table](https://docs.dremio.com/current/sonar/data-sources/entity-promotion/).
- Tick the box to `Extract Column Names` and click Save.
- In the sample data list the icon for this file will have changed from a grey file to a purple table.

Now that the dataaset is a table you generate an Iceberg table in Nessie. Go to the SQL editor and run the following SQL statement:

```
-- Turning the CSV file into an Apache Iceberg table using CTAS
CREATE TABLE nessie.nyc.raw.trips AS SELECT * FROM Samples."samples.dremio.com"."NYC-taxi-trips.csv";
```

This code will create a main directory in Nessie called `nyc` for your project, and within that a sub-directory one called `raw` into which it wrote an Iceberg table, `trips`. Click through into this directory in the Dremio UI to see for yourself.


## Create sub-folders for the models

Nested underneath the `models` directory create the following two directories:
 - `intermediate`
 - `marts`

At this point I also recommend to delete the `example` directory. This was auto-created with your dbt project, but we will not be using it and do not want those models to be executed.

## Create an intermediate model

- Create an .sql file called `int_trips__formatted` within the `models.intermediate` directory. 
- This will take the raw data from `nessie.nyc.raw.trips` and rename and reformat the attributes.
- Use `dbt run` to create the view in Dremio.
- Navigate to `nessie.nyc.intermediate` to view the created view.
- Compare the view with the source file in `nessie.nyc.raw`.

## Create a marts model

- Create an .sql file called `nyc_taxi_gross_income` within the models.marts directory. 
- This will use the intermediate view `int_trips__formatted` and drop unwanted coloumns.
- Use `dbt run` to create the view in Dremio.
- Navigate to `nessie.nyc.marts` to view the created view.
